# Cross government API community of interest meetup - 2019-05-01

## Themes
- Different approaches to government as a platform
- How to do data sharing
- Data standards

## Takeaways
- UK gov is really badly structured; doesn't lend itself to data ownership/sharing
- Legislation says no
- Too much focus on services = user facing services
- There are different patterns of API usage - maybe useful to catalog these rather than talking out APIs as a big nebulous thing
- "Tell us once" is a really powerful principal

## Presentations

### Richard Pope on GaaP across the world
#### India
Aadhar is part of [India stack](https://indiastack.org/about/). Problems and opportunities.

Aspiration is paperless, cashless society.

Have created new institutions. Have institutions outside of government ([ISpirt](https://ispirt.in/)) working on gov tech.

#### Aregentina
- Have a split between API teams and service teams
- Aspiration: Departments should become APIs

#### Estonia
- Aspiration: Use soft power and interoperability to promote trade with other countries
- Now starting to focus on life events and service design (are they in a better position now they've invested in infrastructure?)

#### China
- Social credit is just registers of people + data sharing
- But it's scary because it's opaque (huge contrast with Estonian model)

#### France
- Has APIs for registers (e.g. wine appelations!)

#### US
- Much more API focused
- Managers have an obligation to consider the wider organisation

#### Safeguards
- Lesson to be learned from NHS/Home Office data sharing

#### Funding
- How should treasury assess businesses for platform/API projects?

### Hackney
[HackIT manifesto](https://hackit.org.uk/how-we-work/hackit-manifesto)

Showing the value of API/Platform work:
- With monolithic/tightly coupled legacy systems, technology changes become a threat to your core business. Breaking things apart protects against that
- User need for up to date and reliable information

Measuring success of an API strategy:
- Collaboration
- Innovation
- Reuse

Want to train people, so consider it a sign of success if devs get headhunted.

### ONS
Need for a public API was well known. Set up a team to do it. Product manager was used to work on front end services, so structure of the team was different. Less voices; just him and devs.

Lots more tricky compromises to make that could have consequences later on. Product manager needs to understand more of the detail to make informed decisions.

Recognising the server side iceberg.

Try to understand what you can do up front vs what you can iterate on later.

Tools like postman and swagger are used by the PM for testing the team have built the right thing.

Asking questions important. Need to ask in a way so you can understand the answers and get at the value.

User research involved giving homework to participants: make a thing with this data, come back and tell us about it.

### NCSC on reviewing APIs
Big issues similar to web applications in general.

#### CORS misconfiguration

CORS is two headers: one allows you to whitelist origins, and the other lets you share cookies/credentials. There is a restriction that says you can't use a wildcard for origin while sharing cookies/credentials. But teams oftern try to work around this on the server side.

#### CSRF

People often focus on forms in web apps but overlook CSRF in APIs.

Good design avoids this (don't do dangerous things in GET).

Generate unique token on login for use with follow up requests.

Single origin policy prevents browser from processing resposnes, but doesn't prevent server from processing the request.

#### Client certificate authentication misconfiguration
Used where you have an internal userbase. Works well with things like active directory.

Didn't quite follow this but the vulnerability happens where you only validate certs on initial login, but an attacker can intercept session credentials and impersonate you.

Avoided by checking the cert and checking the session belongs to the cert.

#### Insufficient access control and data validation
Problems arise when your API processes overly complex objects, i.e. the "god object" antipattern - avoid this.

Teams sometimes don't do the same authorization checks on the server side as client side. So if you have a form that shows extra fields to users with escalated privileges, you also need to make sure you check the privileges again once that data is submitted back to the API.

### HMRC Accessible 3rd party tax software
Used to have government gateway, and people have to log in and fill out taxes. But want to transition to having people submit taxes from 3rd party software. So instead of a citizen facing service, you have an API and an ecosystem of 3rd party software.

This API comes with terms of use. We have a responsibility to ensure the 3rd party service is accessible. For web based services that means meeting WCAG 2.1.

So the API comes with an assessment process. Developers get sent a checklist of accessibility guidelines, then they self declare whether they meet the standard. This is grouped into areas of need: visual, hearing, cognitive and motor. The end to end user journey must be accessible to meet the standard in one of these areas.

There is an incentive to comply with this - doing so means the software gets added to a list of software that is presented to users.

The vision is kind of like an app marketplace, though at the moment it's implemented as a finder page on GOV.UK. Originally the software had to meet all 4 areas of need to be displayed, but this didn't match how users thought about accessibility (they don't care what WCAG is). So now, you can select which area you are interested in on the finder page. 


### DVSA API to aggregate vehicle checks
When vehicles get stopped on the road there are tons of data sources which get used to check the vehicle is roadworthy. Wanted to make it easier to perform these checks, now that staff have access to iphones. They were able to reduce the time taken to perform one of these checks from 10-15m to seconds.

### Canada's digital backbone
Canada consider APIs to be the backbone of GaaP.

An example of GaaP: when you book a holiday the service checks your password is expiring soon, and if so, automatically renews it.

The general principle is: don't force users to come to you, meet the users as the point of need.

Canada also have a focus on sharing data internationally. For example, if a drug is recalled, international institutions should know this.

They have been working on an API store, which will soon be on github. The MVP contains 15 APIs. This reduces the barrier to accessing APIs - you don't have to know someone who knows someone to use it.

These APIs have varying governence. When you log in, you only see what you are permitted to access.

Next up they are going to look at operating models and API training for staff who are not used to the API driven approach.

Unlike the UK, Canada have a strong mandate. All department CIOs report to the big CIO, so the office of the CIO can tell people what to do.

They also do a lot of evangelising, and aim to highlight good practice that is already going on. For example there are tax APIs that were developed in collobaration with industry that work well and have been around for years.

This situation positions them well for greenfield projects but they still have challenges around legacy.

### DCMS Data sharing agreements
The digital economy act grants the public sector powers to share data in the public interest. This needs to be formalised into an agreement between the two parties, which goes onto a register. The ICO then reviews them every couple of years.

DCMS have put together a template for creating one of these. This is something you would fill out with your data protection officer.

### Adopting OpenAPI 3 as a standard
- [There's a proposal](https://github.com/alphagov/open-standards/issues/31#issuecomment-481684323)

### Gaps in GaaP unconference session
