# The Legacy of SoCraTes

17 June 2021 6th Edition.

[Youtube recordings are available](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6fFtAv7wTb8Ne8lcwsIE5YcJCuyWs3zV)

# Matthias Noback - Design patterns for modernizing legacy code bases

Authored [Advanced Web Application Architecture](https://leanpub.com/web-application-architecture/)

And [Rector](https://getrector.org/) (automated migrations in PHP)

@matthiasnoback

https://matthiasnoback.nl/talk/design-patterns-for-modernizing-legacy-code-bases/

Legacy definitions

- Code nobody cares for anymore (somebody elses problem)
- Code without tests
- Code where anything could happen

Why aren't there any tests? Devs are bad at testing.

Reinforcing loop of code being hard to test -> code not being tested

Devs might introduce testing into definition of done. But it's hard. It's not a checkmark. Coverage, quality of tests matters.

Steve B in chat:

> Deadlines, budgets & moving targets also seem to have a major impact on the likely hood of untested/untestable code.

Surprising things that could happen

- an entity can send an email
- an entity can save itself to the database or load things

Tradeoff of Flexibility vs maintainability

- Want to go fast, don't think about dependency inversion
- Michael Feathers [Negative Architecture](https://michaelfeathers.silvrback.com/negative-architecture) "things definitely cannot happen in certain parts of the codebase"

Design patterns help

- You know how to find things
- You know how to make changes

Why are codebases with SQL queries all over the place a mess?

- Multiple places where similar things happen
- Missing words from the domain
- Optional validation -> no protection against invalid state

Entity pattern

- DDD book
- Object protects _domain invariants_
- There is an explicit API
- Whenever you have an instance of the object you are guaranteed to have a correct entity
- So there are fewer things that might happen

Repository pattern

- Responsible for saving/loading entities
- You can have entities without identities
- When using a repository you can have identity from the start
- No more corrupt data

Problem: Write model being used for presentation

Why is this bad?

- Prone to N+1 problems
- Exposes a lot of internals so not encapsulating things
- Read-only clients have access to write methods
- Hard to evolve domain model because you have to assume everyone needs all the data

Introduce view model

- Object holds just the right data for the use case
- "View model repository"

Resuable commands

E.g. can only do a thing in a web controller

- Find copy/pasted scripts e.g web/API, web/cron

Solution: Extract class -> Applicaiton service

See Martin Fowler Refactoring book.

Service should accept primitive type arguments
Use entitites/repositories.
Should be independent of framework specific things.

Seperation between domain logic and infrastructure

Problem: we can't invoke one without the other

[gap phone call]

If you have a nice seperation you can take away the outside layer of the application and replace it with a test runner and fake repository implementations

This can be used in greenfield and in legacy.

Testability

- Fast tests
- Stable tests
- Easy to add more tests

If you use these principles the design supports testibility so the code is easier to test, and the code is tested more.

Testing should be fun :)

These patterns help you know what can happen where.

Q&A

Tendency to mix view models and entities because it feels like duplication to seperate them.

- View model is always in support of a particular use case, not creating the entity all over again
- You can give it a different name (e.g. UpcomingMeetup vs Meetup)
- If you have lots of similar view models you can look at combining them
- More view models is generally a good starting point
- It makes it easier to delete code when a use case changes
- If you have one big object then you have a big dependency graph to worry about when you want to remove stuff

Adi in chat:

> Extreme DRY results in very high coupling
> You need some duplication in-between entities

Adding tests

- Start with end to tests
- Introduce patterns
- Then you can introduce unit tests
- It's hard to delete end to test but you have to do it
  - test frameworks sometimes numb the pain by making it easier to test badly organised code

Adi:

> You can use the Golden Master for starting witn end-to-end tests https://blog.adrianbolboaca.ro/tag/golden-master/

Teams can get stuck with too many unit tests and not knowing how to move up to higher level tests, or the other way round.

# Andrea Goulet - Empathy is a Technical Skill

https://www.empathyintech.com/

"Are you technical or non-technical?" -> Identity crisis

Other side of the coin is "technical" people who think they are bad with people

Most other industries don't have this kind of thing

Communication pattern:

Close-ended questions have more bias than open-ended ones
Swap question with "What brings you here?"

There are tons of communication frameworks and patterns.

You can apply this to commit messages, naming things, anywhere where you use natural language.

The "soft skills" "hard skills" divide is an illusion

You code through a computer FOR other people.

Effective communication is build on empathy.

Empathy is not intuitive, it requires analytical thinking

Cognitive

- identifying what others feel

Emotional

- sharing emotions, trying to understand through own experiences

Empathetic concern

- wishing to improve experiences, actively relieve suffering

Negative side:

Cognitive - Emotional = Manipulation, scams
Concern - cognitive = Potential ethics problems due to narrow perspective
Emotional - Self = Doormat

Not walking in someone's shoes - you can't reconstruct someones entire perspective - pretending you can is problematic

John Bakus, author of fortran
_Programming in america in the 1950s_

Cannon-Perry survey of self identified programmers

- "programmaers don't like people"
- Sales people should avoid programming
- Seperated business/scientific programmers

IBM PAT

- 1962: 80% of busineses used aptitude tests for hiring
- De facto gateway into programming through mid-1980s

These stereotypes got embedded into pop culture.
The Roddenberry effect.

Developing empathy skills

Focus on continuous improvement, not perfection

## 1. Mindset

- code for people
- be curious about who will read what you're writing
- learn about empathy like any other programming skill

## 2. Clear your lens

biases/assumptions/experiences/logical fallicies, evalute info sources, active listening, notice unhelpful behaviours and course correct)

## 3. Point perspective

- Seek to understand individuals, not groups
- Recognise impact of data types (e.g. using demographics)
- Consider more than one audience
  - commit messages could be used as evidence in court!

## 4. Communicate

- Where can you leave artifacts of your thinking
- Semantic alignment
  - ubiquoutous language in DDD
- Take a pause before delivering a review to consider other person's perspective

## 5. Share

- Reflect and share experiences
- Nurture _containers for psychological safety_
  - shame-free spaces where you can have vulnerable conversations
  - e.g. rules for a retrospective
  - can be self focused - give yourself permission to mess up
  - Notice shame based language.
    - Guilt: I did something I'm not proud of, I didn't live up to my standards
    - Shame: "I am bad/not good enough"

There was a question about if you could spot "empathy smells" in a similar way to how we have code smells. Yes! That's a really good metaphor to help you identify patterns. Some that are a good place to start are 1) shame vs. guilt based language. are you criticizing the worth/value of a person or are you holding behavior accountable.
a few seconds ago
Andrea Goulet 2) perspective-taking. It can be really useful when you're coding to take the perspective of the compiler to ensure your code will work. But are you stopping there? Seek additional perspectives, including your future self.
a few seconds ago 3) understanding bias and how it shows up for you. Taking the Harvard Implicit Bias test is a great place to start. https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/

# Amitai Schleier - Inside-Out TDDDD

@shmonz

How to bring back Joy and humanity

Nervous, disoriented -> Confident, connected

Goldrat - theory of constraints

Throughput of a system is constrained by a bottleneck

Bottleneck of software development process is human relationships

Industry assumption: reducing reliance on human relationships is the way to ease the bottleneck, e.g. specialisation, defined interactions

Claim: honor, strengthen, grow human relationships

Legacy is a property of the relationship between code and its creators

- Jessica Kerr: Symmathesy
- GeePaw Hill: Made, Making, Makers
- Andrea Goulet: Makers and menders

Unstable Equilibria

- Most code/relationships are a bit legacy
- Workplaces are a bit toxic

Takes ongoing shared effort to maintain the equilibrium

5 war stories where TDD saved the day

Make it hard to not collaborate

- provided shell of the server with red tests and API that needed implementing

Don't have time to implement feature for other team to meet deadline

- asked the person to provide minimal tests expressing the feature
- then implemented it with minimal code

Option 1. Get serious about incremental iterative business involvement. Then discover how to improve iterative development.

SCRUM implementors are often unaware of software development specific risks.

Options 2. (inside out TDDDD) Get good at delivering, people will come to you.

Look around you to see which relationship you can strengthen next.

First step: make the team safe for non-programmers. Improving the relationship between the programmers and the code helps with this.

# Dr. Felienne Hermans - How to Read Complex Code

Author of [The Programmer's Brain](http://www.felienne.com/book)
Host of Software Engineering Radio.

Most programming teaching assumes "the compiler is the teacher"

We celebrate things being hard. Professional culture values exploration and messing around.

58% of time is spent reading code. But we don't teach reading code, we focus on writing it.

With other kinds of teaching we don't just tell people to figure it out. Teachers give instruction and exercises and students practice skills.

Learning about how the brain processes information helps with reading code.

Short term memory can remember only 5-9 elements.

Working memory processes short term memory and draws on long term memory.

Forms of confusion

- long term memory issue - don't understand the concepts (e.g. APL)
- short term memory overloaded - too much info to process (e.g. python list comprehension)
- working memory issue - lots of processing takes energy (e.g. basic)

For long term issues - practice syntax. Can do it with flashcards.

For short term codes you can restructure the code. E.g. translate list comprehension into normal loop.

More familiar form means less chunks. Call this kind of refactoring "cognitive refactoring". You can put it back afterwards.

To support working memory you can use tools. E.g. construct a state table. More ideas in the book.

Start a [code reading club](https://code-reading.org/). Take a piece of code, and discuss it.

There have been other tools

- Code bubbles plugin - every method is a bubble
- IDEs can inline methods as a cognitive refactoring and help you navigate
-

https://www.frontiersin.org/10.3389/conf.fninf.2014.18.00040/event_abstract

An exercise for understanding an unfamiliar codebase

- Write all the variable names in a doc
- Now stop looking at the code
- Do you know the meaning of all these words?
  - Find out about the domain concepts
  - Find out about programming constructs

Kjetil in chat:

> Your question made me think of a talk by Nat Pryce from a few years ago - that is related to understanding systems - about metaphors, technical debt and Conway's Law. The slides are here: https://speakerdeck.com/npryce/what-we-talk-about-when-we-talk-about-software and a video of the talk is here: https://youtu.be/syLjjmRgTsE
